---
layout: page
title: ESPN's Messy Corp. Politics
subtitle: "Nichols v. Taylor"
date:   2021-07-04 21:21:21 +0530
categories: business

---

This week [the NY Times released an artilce](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/07/04/sports/basketball/espn-rachel-nichols-maria-taylor.html) on the messy internal battle at ESPN that had "Rachel Nichols" as a top trending topic on Twitter. It was curious to see why the self-proclaimed 'ally' was being raked over the coals by the social media progressives. But of course, after reading the article and meta-analysis around it, the reaction to the Times' story was emotional and void of nuance and context (shocking, I know). The Times disingenuously contrived Nichols' comments as disparaging of Taylor with harsh racial overtones. This was ludicrous. Rachel went out of her way on a private conversation to say Taylor was great and wished her success at ESPN. The only problem with Nichols' comments were that it exposed her NIMBY mentality as it relates to personal advocacy -- a common infliction among suburban white liberals. She was calling out ESPN for its apparent "crappy" record of diversity, but it wasn't going to be fixed at her expense.
Kevin Draper also ignored the biggest piece of context that would have properly framed the conversation: Rachel didn't lose being the host of the Countdown, she lost her ESPN project, *The Jump*, being the NBA Finals pre-game show.

Rachel Nichols is the driving force behind ESPN's first-ever daily NBA show, *The Jump*, where she is both the star and producer. She leveraged the show's success to contractually secure it as the lead in for all NBA games broadcast on ABC -- *which incldued The Finals*. Maria Taylor had the job of hosting NBA Countdown, which covered all games broadcast on ESPN. The boundaries between them were cut-and-dried. And before the NBA shut down in March 2020 and the world heard of George Floyd, *The Jump* was the NBA pre-game show for ABC's Saturday night telecasts. It seems most of the world has forgotten about this, including the supposed 'paper of record' which omitted such a detail in its piece.

Now, the blow to Nichols that her project wasn't going to be leading the most-watched NBA games of the year would have caused anyone with a shred of pride to say "WTF?". Add that Nichols is a polished host with 20+ years of experience and industry accomplishments. It was clear that ESPN pulling her/The Jump from The Finals wasn't a competency issue. Then layer on the conspicuous timing of Maria Taylor receiving the permanent role, which happened to coincide with the heights of the BLM movement when corporations were clambering to be perceived as diversity 'allies'. ESPN was not immune to this movement. Hell, it might have been in its corporate vanguard. For Rachel to draw the conclusion that ESPN's decision was racially motivated is an elementary deduction. Anyone in her shoes -- black, white, Asian, Latino, etc -- would have rationalized the circumstances the same way. The social media trolls crying racism on Twitter and demanding her head are just the modern-day busybodies who are likely bigger hypocrites than even Nichols.

Nichols' response was table stakes for any ambitious person in a poorly managed company. She informally consulted a friendly PR advisor to devise a political strategy to reclaim the role that had been contractually hers. Given the corporate politics at ESPN were described as a 'snake pit', something that seems to be common knowledge in sports media, Nichols' motives were circumspect rather than nefarious. Her comment was rotten for Taylor's ears, but they weren't directed at her or the public, she was setting the table for the discussion. Interestingly enough, it turned out to be a short strategy session as the top PR advisor, Adam Mendelsohn (who is also taking a lot of heat), basically said she was in an unwinnable battle.


The charge of racism seems to be a projection from the source of the story, who I suspect was trying to create Taylor leverage for a new contract with ESPN. 
The [New York Post reported](https://nypost.com/2021/06/30/maria-taylor-espn-face-divorce-after-near-5-million-offer/) that Taylor was in an acrimonious negotiation with ESPN over her expection of Stephen A. Smith-level money (~$8M), 
while the WWL had dropped their recent offer to the $2M-3M range. With only 3 weeks left before her deal expires, her team threw a mongoose into the ESPN snake pit. It was a cunning and ruthless political move. Not only did it raise the racial implications over the ESPN executives, but it damages
the value and image of her competition the ESPN suits could use against her. 

In my view, the story is more about how nasty corporate politics can be at ESPN with millions of dollars at stake. One might see it generously as a tit-for-tat. One was caught privately saying affirmative action was the reason for the other's ascension,
so the other orchestrated a media story to paint her now rival as a racist. Which action is worse?  Does either deserve sympathy? I have never worked in media, but I understand the egos
are big and that airtime is a zero-sum game. This particular mess reminds me of one of my [favourite quotes from Game of Thrones](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FOvKSrwSl00): **_"When you play the game of thrones, you win or you die"_**. Rachel got caught(perhaps illegally) considering portraying herself as a female victim of reverse discrimination, while Maira played the game by portraying herself as a black female victim of racism at the hands of her rival. In the victimization battle 2021, its no contest. We just witnessed ~~Ned's~~ Rachel's head roll at the steps of the Great Sept of Baelor, and soon we'll see ~~Cersei~~ Maria wearing a crown with an $8 million dollar price tag. 
