---
layout: page
title: "The NBA's TV-Rights Gambit "
subtitle: "Part 1 of 3"
date:   2021-05-16 21:21:21 +0530
categories: business
---


CNBC reporter, Jabari Young, [recently published an article](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/03/22/nba-is-next-up-for-a-big-rights-increase-and-75-billion-is-the-price.html#:~:text=Early%20thinking%20within%20league%20circles,partners%20Turner%20Sports%20and%20ESPN.) announcing the NBA is eyeing a hefty $75B haul in the next broadcast rights deal.
To me, this is a signal that current negotiations aren't going well with its exisiting partners. The annonymous quotes, the startling figures, and dubious timing gives the report the reek of graft.
I suspect that TNT and ESPN are getting cold feet about re-upping at a higher valuation, and this is the NBA trying to apply some public pressure to them. Given the eye-popping numbers, I wouldn't blame the networks for backing off a high-priced deal given the current circumstances. Amidst conspicuous changes and uncertainly in the entertainment landscape, entering an $8 billion
a year contract through 2034 could be disastrous.  The pay-TV business model has been in trouble for years and is now facing an existential threat from the cheaper and more satisfying services offered by tech giants and media conglomerates. Even cable's one ostensible market edge, the inertia from its consumers, is concerning as it doesn't apply to the young people who never watched and won't subscribe. 

>Just a side -- nothing represents cable's disconnect with young viewers more so than the demise of MTV's cultural relevance. From its inception in 1981,
MTV had been a pillar of teen popular culture. However, the rise of social media and YouTube stars have made them dispensible to the children raised online. MTV's
once must-see event programming faded into a wasteland of gimmicky reality TV targeted to the last (and ageing) generation of kids who had watched earnestly.
I suspect if we indexed the year when MTV stopped being fashionable for teens, we would notice an accelerated decline in pay-TV subs happening somewhere in
the 5 to 8-year mark. A scary thought for cable TV network executives is to mentally forecast the demographics and sub counts at the ~25-year mark --a point when the next
NBA broadcast deal would still be ripe.

Given the annual compounding effects from not adding new young subscribers should give anxiety to any network executive considering long-term deals. Then factor this with
 expected leakage from the chord-cutters breaking from cable for streaming platforms. Statista tracked and forecasted US pay-TV subscribers and it's not pretty. The estimated number of subs is expected to fall to 60M in 2025, which is a 40% drop from its peak and near the time when the last deal was negotiated. When applying a CAGR to get get the 2030 value (the middle of the next deal), subscriber counts declines to 47M. 

So, just from the back of the envelope math, the NBA is seeking 3X the money when the best-case scenario for its partners generating half the revenue.
These companies are no longer cash cows with a natural monopoly on in-home entertainment, so it's difficult to imagine how they could suddenly afford to pay the asking price. ESPN and Turner's opperating cuts that layed off hunderds of employees and cancelled programs is a reflection of their new economic realities. If anything, their recent actions should be putting downward pressue on long-term contracts. The NBA may believe its feasible that prices increases is a solution, butasic economic principles would have the sensitivity of its customers raised considerably through the robust competitive landscape of affordable (and better?) alternatives. 

Now, this article might just be the league posturing to combat the negative news surrounding their lacklustre ratings. However, if they are sincere, Adam Silver is badly over playing his hand. In my next blog I'll share my reasoning why the streaming services are not viable options and will not be providing them any leverage against the networks.

Until then..


