---
layout: page
title: "Why I Blog"
subtitle: "Repost"
date:   2021-03-15 21:21:21 +0530
categories: general

---

After many years of contemplating and 50+ unsatisfying hours learning HTML and web design, I launched a personal website.
Despite my previous investment, I always failed at finding the rationale; I had nothing to sell and writing seemed like more of a liability than an asset.
It wasn't until I found David Perell's Twitter feed that changed my mind.  If you are unfamiliar, David is known as "The Writing Guy" on Twitter,
a moniker he earned from sharing wisdom on the power of writing(@david_perell --go follow him now). One of his bits of wisdom is how the personal 
website becoming the new resume. For my new stage in life, it was worth trusting him. I needed a space to share my data science projects and control their presentation.
By distilling the projects in writing would convert what would be a Kaggle submission or Github repo into a shareable asset. 

Another reason I am here is that I have a bit of an axe to grind. I used to write long reports for a boss who created an unmotivating and toxic work environment. This manager  -- who was a cross between Dwight Schrute and Mr. Smithers -- was critical of writing. He told me repeatedly that it was a skill I didn't have. This really pissed me off. I knew I was a better writer than him and his lickspittles. The praise I received from professors, classmates, and colleagues on dozens of papers was confirmation. Yet I still have a chip on my shoulder about his BS feedback. Opening my writing to the public is a cathartic exercise to prove my competence. And if my writing does suck, please let me know via my contact form :).

So why will I go outside of data-specific posts?  I normally would be reserved about sharing such thoughts, but I am convinced that the mainstream media is broken. Their thirst for page views is much greater than offering nuance, data, and different perspectives. The motivation for page views means generating narrative-driven content aimed at large audiences in large quantities. I will write in a unique voice without the expectation of an audiance (tho one can dream). Welocme and enjoy.

JM
